when Alberta's auto industry watchdog
was criticized for not doing enough to
protect consumers including after
several w5 investigations the province
overhauled the agency so we have
partnered again with the Automobile
Protection Association to test whether
that's made a difference in how car
dealerships in that province conduct
their business w5 s John Woodward and
accompany the APA to car Lots in Calgary
to see whether buyers are now getting
fair deals and better treatment so I've
got a few ads here that we've pulled
together comparing ads it's the kind of
thing most people do when they're buying
a new car so you can see as air
conditioning automatic transmission
right now this group is looking at the
ads for you to find out which ones you
can trust George Eenie is the president
of the Automobile Protection Association
the consumer watchdog group is on a
mission it wants to find out if dealers
are delivering on what they promised in
their ads this year it brought its
annual undercover survey to the new car
showrooms of Calgary people want to sell
cars I think there's a culture of deceit
unfortunately in part of the industry
and a lack of will at the level of the
manufacturers I think they've gotten
away doing this for a while after George
sets out the marching orders the APA
shoppers hit the streets cameras are
connected and hidden along with audio
recording devices
the APA secret undercover shoppers will
visit 20 dealers
first up Eastside Kia the secret shopper
spotted this deal a 2016 Forte 5 LX for
fifteen thousand and five that's eighty
five hundred dollars less than the
manufacturer's suggested retail price so
this part so it's this this exact car
which is this is fifteen thousand and
five dollars the price seems too good to
be true for a brand new Kia but the
salesperson confirms the deal and is
ready to write it up but there's a
problem the car in the ad is sold the
salesperson has a compromise a similar
model but with a higher price nineteen
590 that's forty five hundred dollars
more than the car in the ad as for the
first Forte that was sold suddenly it
reappears less than a week later the car
shows up in the Calgary Sun with the
same stock number but the price is now
eighteen thousand seven hundred and
eighty five dollars almost four thousand
dollars more is it possible that this
car was sold and returned maybe sure so
somebody put in an offer on a $15,000
car the offer didn't go through and it
suddenly jumped to eighteen thousand
dollars when it reappeared on the market
I guess it's possible all that enough to
give Eastside Kia a fail the shoppers
now turn their attention to a larger
vehicle with larger savings
varsity Chrysler is up next with what
sounds like a bargain a 2016 Dodge Grand
Caravan a hot deal at twenty five nine
ninety eight a savings of more than
sixteen thousand dollars but right off
the bat the shoppers are told the van
has mileage on it it's not a new van
but the salesperson assures the shoppers
it was only used by the dealer what's
the definition of a new car well a new
car should be a vehicle that hasn't been
driven very much how much is too much
well in transit I could see a vehicle
having twenty-five or fifty K
theoretically once you're showing it or
using it to drive around it's a demo
it's not really brand spanking new it
had 3,000 kilometers on it is 3,000
kilometers still a new car 3,000
kilometers it's not a new car anymore no
in this case with that van did they
advertise that it was explicitly new in
the case of varsity Chrysler it was a
bunch of vehicles featured that appeared
to be new 2016 but when we got to the
dealership this one was a demonstration
[Music]
fee of 571 dollars and that's on top of
the sale price as far as the API is
concerned it's bogus first of all it
doesn't cost you five hundred and
seventy one dollars to fill out
paperwork our extra fee is allowed in
Alberta Alberta like several other
Canadian provinces has a rule called
all-in pricing so the advertised price
has to include everything except your
taxes and maybe one or two small
government charges the prices the price
is the price
sounds simple doesn't it it's anything
but simple
turns out the black Caravan the shoppers
came in for it was sold so they're shown
a red model instead the same price is
the original van but this one has been
driven even further yes you heard
correctly the van they do have has more
than 5,000 kilometers on it could I take
a Dodge Caravan drive it 5000 kilometers
literally across this country and then
sell it making it appear as if it was a
new car is that okay as a consumer the
day you drove off the lot with it you
would be fingered so it could have 50
kilometers on it but it would have
already been titled to you and that
makes it a used vehicle that's the line
in the sand the APA believes varsity
Chrysler misrepresented a used vehicle
as new and added a 571 dollar
documentation feat on to the price that
got them a failing grade
CMP Auto is next on the secret shopping
spree the dealership is offering up a
2016 Chevy Cruze for fourteen thousand
six hundred twenty eight dollars a
savings of three thousand dollars off
the suggested retail price according to
the ad the Cruze is loaded with options
including a backup camera and cruise
control that was an excellent deal for a
Chevrolet Cruze was that the real deal
well as it turned out the question we
should be asking is it was it the real
car it's good so far so good but there's
a hitch it seems there's been a mistake
in the newspaper ad this cruise doesn't
have cruise control or a backup camera
the salesperson does offer to pay for
installation of both options to make up
for the mistake in the end we can still
put a vision camera rear vision camera a
camera but then the salesman drops the
f-bomb F for added fees he add the GST
on on the price plus 936 you don't get
GST on on the piece 976 nine hundred and
seventy six dollars in fees that weren't
advertised that's on top of the price
that's earned the dealer a failing grade
from the APA so far the APA shoppers are
off to a bad start
bringing in the big guns the dealership
has invited in a special team of
commandos to make buyers feel special
I've done over 8,000 contracts when w5
continues
the APA undercover secret shoppers have
been busy visiting 20 dealerships in the
Calgary area as part of the watchdog's
annual survey the focus this year is on
advertising and so far the dealers are
not making the grade we saw some very
creative people writing the ads the real
surprise is how lacks the oversight is
because these are this is all very
obvious stuff for us to find we don't
shop for very long before we turn up
really bad advertising CMP Auto admitted
an error in its ad for a loaded 2016
Chevy Cruze then it tried to charge nine
hundred and seventy six dollars on top
of the price of the car w5 requested an
on-camera interview we were denied but
the general manager Kyle ro Morrell
claimed they knew they were being secret
shopped by the APA and in an email
rights quote we do train our salespeople
with all in pricing and review this with
them regularly he added if a salesperson
misrepresented the price then our sales
managers would correct this upon the
approval of the sale to the customer but
the fact is the salesperson did add
extra fees which are forbidden in
alberta w5 dropped in on CMP okay we're
here from CTV's w5 but finding mr.
Roemer rule wasn't going to be easy when
we finally found a manager he wasn't
talking this dealership failed the APA
annual service survey so you're not
willing to answer any questions about
how your dealership failed the APA
survey we're not doing interviews we're
not authorized yes we had questions
about the fees the administration fees
your dealership charge the APA and I'll
serve it you don't have anything to say
to us or the other customers about fees
that you charge we left CMP with no
answers at Eastside Kia it was a case of
the missing car one min
it was there the next it was sold but
then the same car with the same stock
number was advertised less than a week
later at a higher price we were anxious
to talk to Eastside Kia about how an
advertised car could be sold and then
advertised again our interview requests
were denied and the company told us to
stay off its property in a written
statement dealer principal Kelly temple
informed us that an internal review was
conducted to look into the details of
the situation and that Eastside Kia
takes its responsibility for automotive
advertising guidelines very seriously
he says due to Alberta privacy law he
can't comment on the specifics but says
the company has ended its relationship
with an employee in question remember
varsity Chrysler it's hot deal on a
grand caravan turned lukewarm after the
APA discovered the van had five thousand
kilometers on it adding insult to injury
the dealership was adding an extra
documentation fee of five hundred and
seventy one dollars varsity Chrysler
didn't respond to w5 s request for an
interview but we decided to pay a visit
looking for answers on why a
documentation fee is being charged
whether we're from CTV's w5 and just
sent over here to try and talk to a
manager about some questions we had okay
about ty the APA annual survey and what
happened here is when they were coming
in to search for a Dodge Caravan and
instead of getting a new one they were
given one that had three thousand
kilometers on it okay another option was
another Dodge Caravan with five thousand
kilometers on it so even more and then
on top of that they were they were asked
for five hundred seventy one dollars in
fees so it's that okay if if we're
telling we're told by a ambach and the
APA that that is an unacceptable fee to
charge a consumer that it's against
Alberta long lambic says a documentation
fee is okay if it's at this town
it has to be disclosed in the ad is what
we're told oh it might be standard
policy at this dealership but the rules
in Alberta are clear
all fees must be included in the price
of a car that answer shows you the
contempt dealership management have for
the regulator the fact that they have
absolutely no concern they don't think
they're gonna get punished they don't
even think there's a problem anymore
buying a car can be a confusing and
intimidating experience for consumers
even the APA secret shoppers had their
hands full when they dropped in on
courtesy Chrysler what started as a
routine shopping trip for a grand
caravan at 30% off the manufacturer's
suggested retail price became a marathon
over the course of their visit the
shoppers had to negotiate with three
salespeople including what appeared to
be a rep from Chrysler's head office so
I'm truly here to help like I said a
non-commissioned we don't work the store
my goal is to get as many dogness
Chrysler's and jeeps out on the road so
that you're endorsing me the friends and
family of co-workers and so forth okay
it turns out courtesy Chrysler was
hosting a marketing event known in the
industry as a private sale at two of the
the ships the APA visited a private
sale event was going on and in those
situations the dealership has invited in
a special team of commandos to run a
more pressured sales event and those
people represent themselves as working
for Chrysler Canada for the manufacturer
but in fact we discovered later that
they don't who do they work for
they work for marketing companies they
may come in with the blessing of the
manufacturer to move the metal the
prices are not better necessarily than
what you could get on a date when a
private sale isn't going on in fact w5
has learned that although the rep is
registered to sell cars in Alberta
he actually works for a sales training
company called absolute results if I
can't make it work
again what we can tell you is there is a
certain amount of deception and
misrepresentation going on inside the
event they are basically a hired guns
from a marketing company a consumer
would have no chance against against
those practices yeah and I've also got
some extra money for you from the
manufacturer open above would ever do
that okay
but I've already chatted with Eddie yeah
Jake gave me the ride act and told them
to carry okay Eddie the sales manager
takes his best shot
now that price will have to it's plus
tax on fees and Plus appraisal
all original yes rate is 1795 now guys
this incentive
plus the the fees will go for 686 okay
that is dark that they should be and
they advocate and I am Vic fee and Vic
is the provincial regulator it has a fee
but it has to be included in the
advertised price but there's more and
then we offer we apply a tire and rim
protection in the four years or 80,000
farmers that's eat any night suddenly
the Dodge Grand Caravan for twenty
thousand nine ninety eight doesn't sound
like that much of a deal six hundred and
eighty six dollars for the Anne pick and
documentation fee and eight hundred and
ninety nine dollars for tire and rim
protection a total of fifteen hundred
and eighty five dollars in extra fees
that's a fail ambach does charge a fee
for every car sold in Alberta but it's
not six hundred dollars the ambach fee
is six dollars and twenty five cents but
dealers will bundle that with their own
personal charges and in one case
actually saying it was like ambach and
is six hundred dollars so the M Vick
portion of that fee is one percent
correct the ninety nine percent of that
fee goes to the dealer gravy for me
courtesy Chrysler was apparently willing
to discuss the APA visit but our
repeated attempts to schedule an
on-camera interview failed
we had questions about the extra fees so
we dropped in and visited the showroom
and you knew Samantha said oven time
we've already tried that sir well this
isn't gonna be there out to go
completely years we all we had with a
couple questions about these pcs no
answers add it all up the final score
this year leaves a lot to be desired of
the 20 dealers visited by the APA 17
fails when you have those high failure
rates 17 out of 20 it points to a
systemic problems in the industry it's
not the actions of a few rotten apples
an Vic the Alberta motor vehicle
industry council is the provinces
regulator of new and used car sales the
council has been under intense pressure
from the provincial government for its
handling of investigations related to
infractions in the car industry a
scathing report released last year
resulted in the dismissal of its
president the man in charge now is
interim CEO Doug lecour
good to meet you yes we do come on and
have a seat w5 wants to know and
explains moving forward when it comes to
dealers seemingly breaking the rules at
will we've seen a lot of fees the
undercover operators found a lot of fees
being charged where there was Freight
fees or dealership fees or paperwork
fees is any of that if it's not
advertises any of that okay no it's not
all in pricing is all in pricing so when
they advertise a price that should
include everything except GST and
financing charges do you respect that
the the numbers that APA is found do you
accept that that's a sign of a problem
in the industry well I think that there
is probably always going to be dealers
that are in fracturing the advertising
regulations and that's why we have one
person dedicated to that and that's why
we'll continue to monitor the industry
and we will deal with complaints that we
receive would you watch the undercover
video either from the APA or in the w5
story and would that be enough for you
to do something oh no it would not
why not I would want to get the full
facts before I would take action on that
would you investigate it I doubt it we
might would have to look at the
circumstances
so you would have a offense being
conducted on video using an Vic's name
to collect money for a dealer apparently
but that wouldn't be enough for an
investigation as the video unedited what
was the day that it was shot on those
are questions you might ask in an
investigation yes we asked the CEO if
when he saw the hidden-camera footage
that your shoppers amassed if he saw
that hidden-camera footage on w5 would
that be enough for him to consider
starting an investigation and his answer
was no a regulator that will not look at
the findings in a w5 report has their
head in the sand they should be very
interested in having an independent
review or audit of what's happening in
their market our regulator that relies
on the Sheep to catch the wolves is not
doing its job the reason why they're
called deceptions and misrepresentations
is because the public actually doesn't
know that they're being fleeced it's
such a mess out there what advice would
you give to the consumer to make sure
that they don't get hosed we ask
ourselves that question if we were
shopping along without a w5 camera
without a car dealer helping us in the
background we think we could be had
you